# `.gitignore`

The `.gitignore` file is a file that contains a list of files and directories that Git should ignore. This is useful for
files that are generated by the build process or for files that contain sensitive information like passwords.

`.gitignore` files are largely dependent on the project and the programming language that is used. There are a few tools
that can help you create `.gitignore` files for different programming languages. The most popular are:

* [gitignore.io](https://www.toptal.com/developers/gitignore)
* [gitignore](https://github.com/github/gitignore)

`.gitignore` files apply to all subdirectories of the directory they are in. This means that if you have a `.gitignore`
file in the root directory of your repository, it will apply to all subdirectories. If you want to ignore files only in
a specific directory, you have to create a `.gitignore` file in that directory.

`.gitignore` files can also contain patterns. The most important ones are:

* `*`: Matches any number of characters.
* `?`: Matches exactly one character.
* `**`: Matches any number of characters including slashes. This can be used to match files in subdirectories.
* `[]`: Matches any character in the brackets. For example, `[abc]` matches `a`, `b` and `c`.
* `!`: Negates the pattern. This can be used to exclude files that match a pattern.
* `#`: Starts a comment. Everything after the `#` is ignored.

The `.gitignore` file already applies to the current commit (if it is already tracked).

`.gitignore` only applies to files that haven't been tracked yet, if you want to ignore a file after the fact (for
example by adding a new pattern), you need to remove the file from the repository for it to be ignored.

```bash
git rm --cached <file>
```

You can also have a global `.gitignore` file that applies to all repositories on your computer. This can be useful for
files that are generated by your operating system or your editor. To do this, you need to set the `core.excludesFile`
option in your global Git configuration file.

```bash
git config --global core.excludesFile ~/.gitignore
```

On macOS it is recommended to use the following global `.gitignore` file (these are files that are generated by macOS,
and have nothing to do with your project):

```
# General
.DS_Store
.AppleDouble
.LSOverride

# Icon must end with two \r
Icon


# Thumbnails
._*

# Files that might appear in the root of a volume
.DocumentRevisions-V100
.fseventsd
.Spotlight-V100
.TemporaryItems
.Trashes
.VolumeIcon.icns
.com.apple.timemachine.donotpresent

# Directories potentially created on remote AFP share
.AppleDB
.AppleDesktop
Network Trash Folder
Temporary Items
.apdisk
```

You can find this file, as well as many other global `.gitignore` files, in
the [GitHub gitignore repository](https://github.com/github/gitignore/tree/main/Global).

## Examples

Only exclude the `dist/` folder in the root directory:

```
/dist/
```

Do not exclude the `package.json` file in any directory:

```
!package.json
```

## Resources

* [gitignore.io](https://www.toptal.com/developers/gitignore)
* [GitHub: Ignoring files](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/getting-started-with-git/ignoring-files#configuring-ignored-files-for-all-repositories-on-your-computer)
